welcome to Windsor for this celebration
of the sovereigns official birthday and
given the extreme circumstances of
recent months it's an event that few
believed would happen it won't be the
grand parade that were used to seeing
every year it's a smaller scale event
very much a personal tribute by the
soldiers of the household division it'll
be just as enjoyable so stay with us for
the Queen's official birthday
[Music]
it is a beautiful day in Windsor and
what we have today in essence is a
rather elaborate version of a familiar
event at the castle here the changing of
the guard
carefully adapted this year to provide a
birthday tribute for Her Majesty the
Queen as the current Windsor Castle
guard the first Battalion Welsh Guards
are leading today's ceremony they're
engaged right now in the final
preparations final few minutes it's been
a very different event to the one that
they had been expecting to lead today on
Horse Guards in London for the
full-scale parade but the crisis caused
by the pandemic made that impossible so
the Queen agreed to a more modest event
with some lovely music of course as
usual here at Windsor now it's been a
very busy three months for the armed
forces including the Welsh Guards who
have stepped in to help the efforts to
contain the pandemic so they've had just
a few weeks to prepare for today and the
event of course is even more challenging
because of the demands of social
distancing we can see the distancing in
evidence here with the bands and those
rules apply to all of us here today
now very soon the guards and the band
will all march towards that magnificent
round tower and into the quadrangle
beyond magnificent sight bathed in
sunshine today to pay their birthday
tribute to the Queen so we're looking
forward as usual to some impressive
drill to some rosy marches and some
great Welsh tunes in the mix I have two
experts with me to shed more light on
what's going on to add their thoughts on
today's event
Colonel Hugh bot Eaton who served with
the Welsh Guards from 1981 retired from
the Army after 35 years service as chief
of staff London district so he knows the
household division inside out and I'm
also delighted to welcome once again the
distinguished Royal commentator author
and Daily Mail writer Robert Hardman
gentlemen it's good to have you with us
a warm welcome and Hugh different
circumstances today but the same high
standards yes you thank you same high
standards required we're looking forward
to every little bit of this the whole
event seeing Her Majesty in a 94th year
at the timeless setting listening to the
Welsh music The Foot Guards drill on
this 200th anniversary of such an annual
national event and Robert I suppose it's
worth saying that it's remarkable that
this is happening at all indeed Hugh
until some days ago I don't think we
even expected this event but it's been
such a time of upheaval I think so many
people will find it reassuring today to
see winds are looking so spectacular and
let's don't forget to see the Queen in
action fulfilling an engagement live as
it were for the first time really since
March the 9th well it's nearly three
months since that lockdown was announced
and the national crisis has forced
changes in so many areas of life
and for the guards here today it meant
being on the front line in a different
way facing a deadly new enemy we found
out the battalion was going to be
treating the color sometime again to be
able to command a parade is a huge
privilege my father was in the wash
guards back in the 80s and 90s I went
when I was about five years old to get
watching my first troop ever since then
it's always something I've wants to do
when it was announced that I was gonna
be ensign is very proud nerd two weeks
after finding out that I was the ensign
also found out that the trooping wasn't
gonna happen
Prime Minister has announced a drastic
new measures to tackle the corona virus
after a toll of kovat 19 when starkly
highlighted in the passing of a Grimm
whilst the number of deaths has gone
over 40,000 I got told that we were
going to be taken off public duties and
then set up to help the national fight
against the cave advise small team went
to support testers chessington we were
trained and tested and then became
testers ourselves so initially we tested
members the NHS and then the government
opened up then to the wider public
uppers of a thousand people a day coming
through dealing with this current
situation has hit every strata of
society this was something that was
affecting all of us all of our families
it had an impact across the board
my wife is Indiana's chest she's a
practice manager in in Aldershot Med
Center it is a worry pretty stressful
time for things changing
second-by-second but to be shoulder to
shoulder and working with the NHS staff
and other civilian organizations has
been a really good experience for the
men and women
I've named for about three weeks now
that we might be able to do a parade of
some sorts we've had two weeks to
prepare normally do 2.2 training months
in advance this parade is very different
to what we'd normally do is conducted on
grass and most uniquely of all it is
socially distanced that is the hardest
thing we've got to get across to the
guys now they're used to being an arm's
distance away from each other so as you
can imagine sort of almost double or
treble a distance has been difficult and
the way we've done that is by use of a
pay stick initially it was a bit weird
having to keep three paces between
everyone but now we've been doing it for
lost two weeks it's become normal
there's every young ghazals dream to
treat their regimental collar in front
of the Queen normally I would receive it
from the regimental saw major and they
didn't fart in front of the majesty I
now carry on the column myself and they
march it through without doing a
flourish it's one less thing to mock up
commanding a battalion is a huge
privilege and I'll be incredibly proud
on the day to be standing in front of
Welsh Guardsmen and recognise everything
that the army and wider services are
done in support of the national fight
against david 19 just an insight into
the activity of the past few months
there and a point we make every year as
we look ahead to the parade is that the
ceremonial skills of the very smart
troops of the household division that we
can see here today in windsor that
shouldn't blind us to the fact that
these are very much fighting soldiers
and their regimental records tell their
own story and hue we often talk about
this dual role the ceremonial and the
operational but we're also talking today
about the skills that men and women have
put in two different spheres of activity
yes the dual role is our identity it's
our res on - we are we are well known
for both and both contain as we can see
many different possible
for kovat 19 the Welsh Guards have had
to adapt by reorganizing retraining
equipping in order to reinforce
nationwide under the joint military
command London they have prepared for
these eventualities and are able to
react 24/7 and both roles as you can see
complement each other some of the final
inspections taking place making sure
that everything is absolutely perfect
extremely high standards for all the
four guard regiments as we know Welsh
Guards not being an exception and for
the man lead in the Welsh Guards today
getting this event ready in record time
a major challenge for Lieutenant Colonel
Henry so well inertia the field officer
in Brigade waiting he's been talking to
my colleague Sonali Shan left-hand
Colonel we've seen the Welsh Guards
assisting the NHS and others in the
national effort has there been an extra
sense of pride because it's all been
happening on home soil yeah a huge
amount of pride to be able to play our
part in the support to the NHS and
indeed some of the other agencies out
there in the fight against of RSC new
particularly important for us to be able
to help in London and support wherever
we can you haven't had long to get ready
for today's event and in that short time
you've had to learn a new way of doing
things as well as adhering to social
distancing rules will there be different
nerves this time well I think we know we
we train we train to train the nerves
out we've trained pretty hard for the
last three weeks but undoubtedly
there'll be a few out there who are you
know the occasion adds a little bit to
it so there will be some out there who
are got a few notes but you know I have
every confidence that the profession of
the boys and girl on parade will be will
be spot on well today mean for the
guards themselves that means an awful
lot to all of us near the the honor and
the privilege to be able to troop on
color and to be able to mark her
Majesty's official birthday it's
fantastic to be able to do it in our
hometown is very special where the
battalion is based is is a particularly
special moment for all of us
I'm curious what will be going through
your mind as you're standing on the
quadrangle waiting for Her Majesty to
arrive I think I'll be like everyone
else focusing on know what I've got to
do next
remembering the words of command and
waiting for my tea to come out and just
savoring that moment and all say you
know the the real privilege to be able
to represent our battalion or regiment
but also the wider house of division and
and all of us will be on parade will be
focused on on giving the best we can
Lieutenant Colonel all the best for
today thank you very much field officer
talking to sonali and as we get ready
for the event first battalion most
guards are engaging in the arms drill
it's something we haven't seen before
the day of a birthday parade so you just
tell us briefly what's going on here yes
they're just preparing for the arms
drill now this is a Walmart of mind and
body it's time for everybody to switch
on 100% for final rehearsal and
synchronization and it represents the
culmination of all those preparations
that we've just heard about for this
recently formed and diverse team now if
we keep a very sharp focused eye on
these ranks we will spot Guardsmen Rhian
Morgan from Newport Narayan is one of
only two female Guardsmen in the Foot
Guards regiments and she joined the
Welsh Guards this year she's been
involved with the coronavirus testing
facilities at chessington and we were
chatting to reown just earlier this week
about this role and she was very modest
and really being incredibly humble about
the role but the point is who she does
represent a very important development
for the guards regiments yes you I think
first to say that this is a big moment
for everybody on parade and Guardsman
Morgan joins a long line of Guardsmen
from Newport and South Wales in making
the grade and joining the Welsh Guards
she told me that she wants no special
attention and that she wanted to join
earlier than she has
and it's like serving with a band of
brothers but yes her blood and
regimental family are right behind her
in this her first big event well we wish
her well we wish them all well of course
everyone taking part today in this
parade because it's a special event it's
a bit of a one-off event because of the
circumstances of this year and Robert
it's a remarkable thing to reflect that
the last time there was any kind of
birthday tribute involving the Armed
Forces here at Windsor was believe it or
not back in 1895 in the closing decade
of Queen Victoria's reign that's right
here it was birthday parade for Queen
Victoria worth noting that back then it
was to mark her 76th birthday and she
watched the parade in a carriage today
and we can confidently expect to see Her
Majesty at the age of 94 arriving on
foot indeed and we shall see that in a
short while we've been focusing
initially on the Welsh Guards because
it's their central role today but let's
not forget all seven regiments of the
household division have offered their
support in the fight against the corona
virus pandemic overseen by Major General
Chris and his team we're getting a
per oddly decreasing rate deaths are
coming down both day on David also week
on week I'm just watching the continued
support for London Ambulance Service and
I'm noticing a decreasing wait time to
which we've undoubtedly contributed
the household division have been huge
engaged with kovetz 19 just here in
London we've had the Welsh Guards and
the Grenadier Guards furiously busy like
us doing mobile testing teams to support
this nation in that time of crisis where
felish college to conduct a mobile
testing unit support in the NHS by
freeing
NHS members up to conduct their
essential duties in hospitals lots of
surgeries this has to be balanced
website for me this is very important
I'm very proud to be able to help out
our country in any way it's definitely
the right place to be as far as works
concerned down on the art of wines
discuss guards have been working hard in
support of the NHS and public health
England's due to the high proportion of
vulnerable people on the Isle of Wight
it was especially important when we did
our tasks as quickly as possible our
mission was to double the bed capacity
us and Mary's Hospital from 200 to 400
beds managed it with only 30 men in 8
days to be involved from the frontline
with the NHS in the fight against koban
19 was very rewarding for the whole
person evening we were clapping for the
NHS my wife Sarah she's a neonatal
intensive care nurse and I think it's
really good for us in the army to show
our appreciation for all of NHS they are
putting their lives on the line for the
whole country
when we look back and ask ourselves what
did we do
during the coronavirus crisis I can be
hugely proud of what my soldiers have
done this time not on state ceremonial
public duties or in active operations
but here doing mobile testing when the
nation asked us to help we were there
[Music]
very familiar tune god bless the Prince
of Wales and what makes the parade of
course for so many observers is the
quality of the music an indispensable
part of the Queen's official birthday
celebration and we have musicians today
drawn from all the Foot Guards regiments
of the household division and the man in
charge is Lieutenant Colonel Simon more
commanding officer of the household
division bands and he stepped into the
role last year
he's a notable composer in his own right
last month playing a prominent part in
the VE Day commemorations and a
remarkable job to get all the musicians
together for this event he's been
talking to tsunami left Hannon Connell
when you took on this role this wouldn't
have been the event you're expecting how
have preparations been going well it's
been pretty good actually
musicians have been on lockdown as well
as doing other duties related to covered
19 but the old practice they've got
their instruments at home so they're all
busy beavering away and keeping up their
instrumental performance so as we've
come together for these rehearsals for
today's ceremony
I think the preparations have gone quite
well like all of us all the musicians
will have to be two metres apart what
challenges has that created enormous
challenges actually but we don't done a
lot of rehearsal on that one of the
particular difficulties is as the band
county marches back through itself
normally the musicians are
shoulder-to-shoulder
of course we've got to maintain social
distancing at all time and and we are
doing that and and to help that we're
furthering the band as we come into the
county March so the front of the band
expands to twice its width so as
musicians countermarch back through the
ranks we still maintain some two and a
half metres distance between each player
under normal circumstances the Queen's
official birthday is marked at Horse
Guards Parade but today you will all be
on the Quadrangle what difference will
that make
acoustically I think the acoustic there
is a little bittersweet for a start were
on grass which soaks up the sound and
kind of doesn't help us but the sound
travels and just cascades off those
beautiful castle
walls and resonates around the whole of
Windsor Castle so I think on balance
it's a pretty good acoustic and the
musicians will really enjoy performing
there today
leftenant colonel thank you we look
forward to hearing and seeing new
musicians today Dan Colonel Simon Hall
they're talking to sonali and his
colleague is in the midst of the players
here major Stuart Halladay who director
of music of the Welsh Guards and in
September he'll be celebrating 35 years
in the Army he's helped put the music
selection together today so no surprise
he's chosen some of the best Welsh
Marches for us all to enjoy great sight
of the low award of windsor castle
looking up towards the st. George's
Chapel and the round tower and since
early March her Majesty the Queen and
His Royal Highness Duke of Edinburgh
have been here at Windsor this castle
has been a royal residence for nine
hundred years the Queen will be the only
member of the royal family attending the
parade today and Robert one noticeable
absentee among several it must be said
the Prince of Wales who of course is
Colonel of the Welsh Guards indeed here
yes the Prince of Wales has been Colonel
of the Welsh Guards now for 45 years
longest-serving colonel in their history
and we were also we won't be seeing
other members of the family I mean it's
worth remembering this as always
normally the great family get together
when we see not just the senior members
of the family but the whole extended
family including of course with the
scene on the balcony for the fly past we
won't see that today we won't see for
example the Duke of Cambridge in his
role as Colonel of the Irish Guards
either
we'll just see Her Majesty but I'm quite
sure that all the family are as we speak
watching and waiting
so already in the low award for the
officers to take up their positions
which will happen in just a few seconds
time and we will be seeing three
officers who will be ready to come and
the men as they are marched up to the
quadrangle will see the major of the
parade and the adjutant and then they'll
be followed by someone we've heard from
already who is the commanding officer
Lieutenant Colonel Henry Suellen uh sure
they're joining the various ranges of
soldiers who've been coming here today
because these of course represent the
Welsh Guards but they are representing
the household division in all its
quality and all its glory so the major
of the parade Major James Aldrich whose
great-grandfather was one of the first
officers commissioned into the newly
raised Welsh Guards in 1915 today's
adjutant captain ed Clark it's his last
working day in the army by the way
taking over his role will be his brother
captain will Clark and their younger
brother Cameron's due to join the
regiment in August so the major and the
adjutant and they'll be followed by the
commanding officer Lieutenant Colonel
Henry Cavill annasher today's field
officer in brigade waiting and he took
command of the regiment in March of last
year
go son
Oh
[Music]
so it's the turn of the color party to
take their positions usually the color
would be carried by a color sergeant and
passed to the ensign by the regimental
Sol major but in order to maintain
social distancing in today's event the
ensign today will carry the color for
the entire ceremony and he's second of
tennant Billy Richardson word about
Billy because Hugh knows his father are
the well don't you
yes Ollie and I joined the army together
in 1981 Ollie was a well-loved leader of
the little Iron Men in number three
company we both deployed to Kenya for
training and we were placed on standby
for operations anywhere in the world
relying on the unexpected to happened
which of course they Judy did so we
sailed south to the Falkland Islands in
May and we were both on the sea Galahad
when it was struck sadly on the 8th of
June mercifully Ollie is a survivor and
went on to marry Mary Ann a wonderful
wife and mother and so we have Billy on
parade here today who ironically
deployed deployed to the full condolence
recently to continue his father's work
in deterring aggression
[Music]
so the field officer gives the command
to step off on their way to the
quadrangle for this year's birthday
tribute March is Piccadilly proposed by
major Lesley Statham served with the
Welsh Guards a prolific composer in his
day marches are still very familiar
today so let's enjoy some of the music
shall we because it's one of the great
Highlands
[Music]
[Applause]
so we enjoy some great music in the
bands being led towards the Quadrangle
and the Round Tower by the senior drum
major and the Welsh Guards drum major
Welsh Guards on parades debut selected
from all three companies of the first
battalion which is quite unusual the
troops of the hustle division have been
continuing to guard the Royal Palaces
throughout the lockdown
although these ceremonial guard changes
have been canceled and it's a good
moment you to ask you about Windsor
because you have a very vivid memory of
being here or duty oh yes you like many
other young household division officers
I did my first guard duty here within a
week of leaving training at Sandhurst
it's a lovely command working with the
royal household and the police it's a
great preparation for the biggest stage
in London and if you're really lucky
when you're on guard you may well be
invited up for dinner with her Majesty
Robert it's worth us asking as well
because many viewers will be wondering
but all the residences that the Queen
tends to share the your'e among Windsor
was the natural choice for this lockdown
period it was Hugh the crisis began
really just as the Queen was preparing
to head here for Easter court anyway and
she's now been here it's probably her
longest spell continuous spell at
Windsor Castle throughout her life but
this is very much home there we see the
estate wins a great park I mean this is
a place she she was here as a girl
during the war this is where she made
her very first broadcast famously in
1940 this is a place where she she
really she went to school most of her
school lessons were conducted here so
it's it's its home and it's why today
that the site of the most guards coming
here onto the quadrangle for hurry it
well more than aware of the Queen
is keeping a sharp eye on events is the
Major General Chris and among his
party a colonel Crispin Lockhart who
represents both be lifeguards and blues
and rolls of the house of cavalry major
Victoria flood Marley officer for the
King's Troop Royal Horse Artillery also
present are the brigade major lieutenant
colonel guy stone and the garrisons art
major Andrew Stokes who always plays a
leading role of course in organizing
these events and she was we mentioned
the brigade major and the garrisons art
major
they are the key axes aren't they oh yes
they lead the design team on behalf of
the major-general they're the Masters of
the detail and they have to brief all
the participants on all the detail guy
stone his two potential officer sons
potentially watching on he's got a
potentially taxing task of obtaining
pinpoint accurate weather forecasts to
recommend a go or no-go decision for
this parade as I found when I was in the
job Vern Stokes
he's the fourth garrison song major that
I've seen and as his regimental motto
goes he's second to none
and I find him the least frightening of
the four
so the enter the Quadrangle great royal
standard the birthday standard flying
above the keep the round tower the
statue of king charles ii overlooking
the quadrangle here as the masked bandit
tiers the welsh guards arrive
great site at Windsor Great Park
extending way beyond the castle
[Music]
very happy day of the wedding of the
Duke and Duchess of Sussex two years ago
they taken around the park in that
carriage possession
[Music]
music changing to the auxiliary
territorial service March a significant
choice today because the 80s was the
regiment which Her Majesty served in the
war
the tune starts attuned that Her Majesty
will know very well I mean join the 80s
in 1945 becoming the first female member
of the royal family to join the Armed
Services as a full-time active member so
I think it's fair to say before her
Majesty steps out from the sovereigns
entrance they've been listening very
carefully to the quality of the music
and keeping an eye on the precision of
the drill and movement of the guards
here because our experience of these
events parades cannot be beaten frankly
Windsor Castle God will advance right
turn
[Music]
go dressing right just
so not long before her Majesty the Queen
appears and will take a place on the
saluting base but also in residence here
as I mentioned is the Duke of Edinburgh
who just a few days ago celebrated his
99th birthday and the palace published
this rather wonderful image of the
couple Queen and the Duke of Edinburgh
and Robert I think it's a fair bet that
the Duke himself will having retired
from public duties a few years ago and
having reached the grand age in 99 will
be looking out from probably one of
these windows just to see that
everything's in tip-top condition yeah I
think you're actually right here as a as
a colonel of both former colonel of both
feet Welsh Guards and the granted is
that the Duke knows this knows the the
the parade routine better than almost
anyone with the possible exception of
the Queen for him this is this is just
as much home he is actually although
he's retired from public life as you
said one thing he hasn't retired from
he's still the Ranger of the Great Park
we see the Great Park there beyond the
castle walls
he keeps an incredibly close eye on
everything that happens hereabouts don't
forget when when Windsor had its
terrible fire in 1992 it was the Duke
who who led the the restoration work
everything about this place bears his
imprint so he will be keeping a very
close eye on everything today
[Music]
good shoulder East are easy
so here we have the color party which
will soon detach to wait on the north
side of the quadrangle two centuries
with the ensign our sergeant Reece Brown
recently returned from Belize and
Sergeant Rhys Rutledge who joined the
regiment a decade ago
he's been widely praised for designing
and managing the defeat don't repeat
scheme that is aimed at helping
vulnerable young people and former
prisoners to change from their previous
lives to realize their potential in
society the colour itself the colour
being trooped today in the heart of the
ceremony was presented to the regiment
in 2015 by the Queen here at Windsor
that was the scene on the day in
question celebrating the centenary of
the raising of the Welsh Guards by king
george v during the first world war in
1915 colour is richly embroidered with
the Welsh dragon and features the
regiment's motto Kamri and beef meaning
Wales forever as well as 21 of the
regiment's 47 battle honours one of
those is the Falklands and tomorrow
marks the 38th anniversary of the end of
that conflict in June of 1982 and she
we've already mentioned the conflict
itself and your personal connection with
some of those involved in your presence
there and that date of 1982 has enormous
residents especially for the Welsh
Guards yes indeed you are that colour is
a torch that sheds light on many of our
past conflicts unless we forget it is
the 18th 80th anniversary
of the defense and Eris Dunkirk and
purloin when the Welsh Guards were the
only formed unit in in Arras for the
Falkland Islands the battalion played
its part in the nation's victory with 38
sandy lost and many more wounded and
suffering but boys and your families we
hold you in our hearts and the regiment
is here for you
[Music]
there's the officer in overall charge of
these troops indeed all the troops of
the household division also known as the
general officer commanding London
district and that is Major General Chris
who took out his posts last
November he's been speaking to Sonali
major-general this is your first
ceremonial occasion since taking over
command of the household division I know
you're trained to expect the unexpected
but have the past few months been
particularly unforeseen for you I don't
think any of us could have expected the
summer that is I'm rolling out of
transfers but I think for us it
underlines the fact that we are both
operational soldiers we conduct
operations wherever were required to do
so in this case in the United Kingdom
there were also high class ceremonial
soldiers and that is what I'm going to
see a bit of this morning why is it so
important for the household division to
mark the Queen's official birthday this
year in particular I think part of it is
a tribute to the Queen for her guidance
to the nation during this very difficult
time
but also tripping the colors are well
established a much loved part of the
ceremonial summer and so custom is
important and even though it's much
reduced we're very proud to be doing it
this morning you're in charge of
overseeing the planning of today's event
and you've had to adhere to social
distancing guidelines as well as
remember those historical protocols so I
think for us we're very mindful of the
circumstances and we must probe the
Ryder parade which is appropriate to the
national situation as you say it must be
socially distance but then it's got to
knit in some of the well established
traditions of trooping the colour and so
doing that has been a great challenge
but we've enjoyed doing it we've seen
the guardsmen being part of the national
effort assisting the NHS on the front
line how has that been being on home
soil so everybody has been hugely proud
to be a part of what has been an amazing
national effort I think that everybody
involved the opportunity to help the
opportunity to support the NHS and the
healthcare sector and be part of this
great national effort at a time like
this is something we've enjoyed doing
and we've been really proud to be apart
of major-general thank you so much
Major General Chris talking to
Sonali just a short while ago because
he's now on parade ready for this
birthday tribute to Her Majesty the
Queen and just to underline his
responsibilities for all of the troops
on parade today indeed all of the troops
in the household division it's
interesting Robert isn't it that we've
been talking about the Armed Forces role
in recent months stepping in to help the
Health Service and other public bodies
during this pandemic and of course the
fact that the lockdown has changed the
lives of millions of people were also
talking of course about the royal family
because the kind of work that they would
be undertaking has of course been
completely transformed and in so many
areas canceled absolutely here I think
perhaps what indicates it more than
anything is if you look at the court
circular the official account of royal
engagements every single one now is by
video link by telephone the Queen in
April held the first-ever meeting of the
Privy Council by video lingual she's
been communicating with ambassador's
with prime ministers of other realms all
the members of the royal family have
been doing this and they've adapted very
quickly the Prince of Wales has done an
extraordinary number of broadcasts now
on everything from a broadcaster to
cheesemakers to the Samaritans to the
Commonwealth and
as one common date abilities become a
king of instagrams one of his team said
the other day he's been in front of the
camera almost as often as Hugh Edwards
of late we better steady on the robber
Dungey the interest for me was the fact
that the Queen of course has undertaken
not one but two televised addresses one
was to do with the day the other was to
do with a real message to all the people
of the UK during this pandemic crisis
yes the the the first broadcasts are
coronavirus broadcasters as many people
call it was came at an absolutely
crucial moment the nation needed some
reassurance in that particularly dark
period and we had those remarkable words
from the Queen culminating of course in
her message that we will meet again and
then on on V on VE Day her message again
was you know never never give up never
despair and I think as ever in in times
of crisis as we saw as previous
generations will remember during the war
in times of crisis we do turn to our
monarchy and and that's exactly what
we're seeing here again today very soon
the band will strike up with one of the
best tunes of all time it is the Welsh
Guards slow March men of Harlech which
dates from the 18th century said to have
been inspired by the seven-year siege of
harlot castle during the Wars of the
Roses in the 15th century
let's just enjoy char we in all its
majesty
[Music]
god
Oh Shawn
so in the 68 year of her reign a rare
first for Her Majesty the longest
reigning monarch in British history
she'll mark her official birthday not on
Horse Guards Parade and at Buckingham
Palace but here at Windsor Castle
the queen is courted by Lieutenant
Colonel Mike Vernon the controller the
Lord Chamberlain's office the Vice
Admiral tony johnson burt master of the
household and she will also be
accompanied by her query major nana
coffee Joe Massey Ankara
so the ceremony will begin at 11 o'clock
the field officer will order the rotten
[Music]
go slow
winds the coastal guard will move to the
right entries right turn
good food order
quick Oh
[Music]
God making the wait at the south side of
the quadrangle to the tune of the rising
of the laughs making the way for the
band to perform be majestic Marge let
you know in just a moment it is one of
the most popular military marches
[Music]
Windsor Castle God will retire right
turn
God dressing right just
showed arms
true
[Music]
and we'll be watching out for a new
manoeuvre allowing the band to maintain
the social distancing while turning as
they set off they'll begin fanning out
to create more room
it's been called feathering because of
its distinctive extending formation
[Music]
[Applause]
senior drum major signaling that it's
the quick march music changing to the
tune Triple Crown which has been herded
to birthday parades in the past 1973 and
1998 the band performing the spin wheel
turning 180 degrees while maintaining
that social distancing it's not move
we've seen before the Queen seems to be
enjoying the music
[Music]
the elements of the traditional parade
that will be familiar to viewers the
moment for the lone drummer to break
away to join the guard davon Corporal
chooses ivali originally from Zambia
joined the Corps of drums in 2011 he's
been awarded the exemplary leadership
award while deployed in Afghanistan and
rated top student in his class
[Music]
drama playing eight bars of a field
signal called the drummer's call
reminding us of the time when
communications on the battlefield were
delivered by drumbeat
and first Battalion now preparing for
the next phase of the parade Windsor
Castle guard will move to the right turn
the guard will be setting off to the
rousing tune of the British grenadiers
to take their position in the center of
the quadrangle
[Music]
hold with the cost of God will advance
right turn now in the traditional parade
the regimental saw major would now be
taking the color from the color party
handing it to the ensign but due to the
social distancing we mentioned that
isn't possible so today and usually the
ensign is carrying the color for the
entirety of the ceremony God dressing
right dress
and we have the regimental sod Major
Michael Perry detaching from the guard
to join the color party and he's drawn
his sword to protect the color
let's go to the color Center color party
stepping off to the tune escort to the
color ready to carry out the ceremonial
heart of this event as they troupe the
color through the ranks
[Music]
this serves the purpose of course not
just at the ceremony of trooping the
colour it's a guard change 18 soldiers
making up the body of the parade the new
guard at the castle for the next few
days under the command of the ensign
Billy Richardson and Hugh just to
underline the pride of the family and
the regiment yeah this is definitely
Billy's moment and his parents and all
his many followers now all be mixed
we'll be looking with a mix of pride joy
and some nerves in equal measure
[Music]
color party now rejoining the guard
ready for the second royal salute of
this event
good royal 8 reasons
[Music]
[Applause]
good shoulder so the color has been
trooped the ceremony's complete the
field officer approaches her majesty to
let her know the guards are ready to
march off your Majesty's guard is ready
to march off ma'am
God slow and when terkoz forgot were
mere to the right entries right turn
good morning officer moves to the front
of the guard ready to lead his troops
from the quadrangle after this ceremony
good boy left quick march
[Music]
the final formality they approach the
majesty guards will pay their own
individual tribute to their
commander-in-chief
[Music]
this is the moment you when there is
some eye contact between the guards and
her majesty it is for each of them a
special moment yes the guards been an
hour turning into the home straight and
it's their final chance to impress Her
Majesty and all of those looking and yes
if you're really lucky you'll catch the
twinkle in her Majesty's eye
[Music]
a majesty looking on and snowed out
enjoying the tunes of the Welshman
arranged by Lieutenant Colonel hanim
written for the Welsh Guards 75th
anniversary back in 1990 based on
several very familiar Welsh melodies and
folk tunes I think it's fair to say it
wasn't the official birthday celebration
that the Queen would be expecting at
this time of year but the fact that
there's been a birthday celebration of
any kind
during this national crisis is a
remarkable achievement few some final
thoughts on how this parade has passed
off well it was a pity not to be on
Horse Guards but that was a fitting
event and it's the least that we could
do and indeed the most that we could do
under the conditions well executed
maintaining and setting standards the
battalion is now looking forward to its
next tasks and preparing for the next
unexpected but we look forward to the
Household troops next year on Horse
Guards for our great sovereign Robert in
this rather strange and very sad year in
many ways what does the rest of the er
GB hold for Her Majesty and members of
the royal family while here if monarchy
stands for anything it's for stability
it's for continuity I think today what a
wonderful sight it's probably the most
memorable birthday parade I can recall
no crowds they were all family not even
a birthday almost list but here we have
the monarch and her guards nice to see
her as well wearing that dumb and leek
the brooch of the Welsh Guards and and
so it's very much about keeping calm
carrying on we've got Armed Forces Day
coming up data this month Vida VJ Day
the 75th anniversary the Queen will be
at the heart of those commemorations
later in the year but I think today a
really wonderful reassuring reminder
that some things really do carry on
well the garrison sergeant major said
before the event that Toby couldn't
deliver the usual scale of the normal
birthday parade they could nonetheless
deliver exceptional quality and humor
Brahmins have no doubt you'd agree with
me that they've certainly done so this
year's special occasion is over in
effect
birthday parade for the Queen a one-off
event really in modern times due to the
challenges posed by the pandemic just a
few weeks to remind you to put this
event together and it's been a real
triumph for the whole division and the
Welsh Guards in particular and you can
see it all again because our highlights
program is on BBC one this evening at
five to six but for now from my special
guest Colonel he Boddington and Robert
Hartman my colleague Sonali Shah all of
the BBC team at Windsor thank you for
watching and good bye
[Music]